Title: notes on the command line
URL:
save_as: index.html

## Background ##

Sometimes I have to remind myself how to double click and drag and drop. Over the past few years I've gotten so used to the command line that it's become my default way to get around on a computer. Don't get me wrong, I use a graphical desktop environment 95% of the time, but I almost always have a terminal open alongside all my other applications. I don't see this as good or bad, just a way of working I've become accustomed to.

A lot of people see the command line as an "advanced" environment, something for experts and hackers and expert hackers. It can be used that way, in the sense that you can do some complex things from the command line that are difficult, sometimes impossible, to do any other way. But the reality for me is that a huge percentage of the time I'm in a terminal, I'm running commands like **cd** or **ls**, which combined are basically the equivalent of double clicking on a folder. I also launch graphical applications from the terminal, but again that's basically the equivalent of clicking on something. 

Why do I do this? I'm working on a longer blog post on that, but the short answer is that the command line can offer ways to do the equivalent of a lot of clicking without actually having to click. It offers ways to analyze files, process and manipulate data, and link together multiple tools in ways that can save you a lot of time, especially if what you're trying to do involves a lot of repetition. And in a modern desktop computer environment, you always have the option of opening up a graphical application if that's the best tool for the job. Unless you're on a server, you're probably not going to find yourself staring into the void surrounding a dollar-sign symbol and a blinking cursor, wondering what you've done.

When you spend as much time on the command line as I've done, you start to build up a memory repository of commands and how to use them. But you also find yourself looking up the same things over and over again if you don't do them enough to memorize them. For a long time I've relied on a combination of my own command history, a few notes files here and there, saved or bookmarked pages on Q&A sites like Stack Overflow, some documentation sites and tech books, and just plain earching when I need to as my command line "reference" methods.

This site is an attempt to bring some order to my command line usage in a way that I hope also helps others. Somewhere between a cookbook-style reference and a set of manual pages, I'm compiling my accumulated knowledge about the commands I've used at least once, and the options I've used most, into individual posts on each command. More idiosyncratic than comprehensive, I'm only going to cover what I've learned and use myself. In some cases the posts are short, sometimes not much more than pointers to more official documentation. In others, I discuss the affordances of the command's various options, why you might choose that command over a similar one or vice versa, common pitfalls I've run into, and more.

To give an example: the manual page for **rsync** is long, detailed, and some sections are just plain hard to understand. I haven't written a new manual page in my **rsync** notes. Instead, I've written about when I might use **rsync** vs. another copying command like **cp**; what kinds of tasks I do where I prefer to use **rsync** if I can, which options I've found useful, why, and how they work; and common errors I've made that I'm trying to avoid making again by writing them down.

I've thought about whether to keep this as a single-author site or to open it up and I've decided that at least at the start, because I'm launching this with many pages still to be written, to keep it as my own set of notes. However, I welcome feedback: my goal is to learn and help others learn, so if I have something wrong I want to fix it. But this is a static website and I don't feel comfortable hosting my own comments database or outsourcing comments to a third-part plugin that may or may not take good care of people's data.

So what I'm doing for now is putting the code for this site in a public repository on github: [[provide github link]] Please submit an issue if you have a suggestion to make. I only ask for some patience as I'm fairly new to github and completely new to responding to issues. I can also be reached at the email on my contact page, if you'd prefer not to file a public issue.